feat: introduce carbide-instrument for unified logging and metrics (#3192)
NVIDIA/bare-metal-manager-core: docs/observability/instrumentation.md

named, and with metric cardinality bounded by the type system.

---

## TL;DR

- **Just logging words? Keep using `tracing::`.** `info!`/`warn!`/`error!` with structured
  fields stays the right tool for plain logs; nothing migrates for its own sake.
- **Need a count, rate, or duration? Declare an `Event` and `emit()` it.** The event's two
  knobs -- `log = error|warn|info|debug|trace|off` and `metric = counter|histogram|none` --
  cover metric-only, log-only, or both from the same call.
- **Cardinality is enforced by the types.** `#[label]` fields must be bounded via
  `LabelValue` -- usually a fieldless enum, with a manual impl on a bounded newtype as the
  reviewed escape hatch; high-cardinality detail (`machine_id`, IPs, error text) goes in
  `#[context]` fields, which appear on the log line only and *cannot* become a metric label.
- **The metric name in the attribute is the exposed name, verbatim** -- what you grep on a
  dashboard is the string in the source. The derive validates it at compile time
  (`carbide_` prefix, `_total` for counters, a unit suffix for histograms).
- **Point-in-time state (gauges) is unchanged.** The kit models *occurrences*; observable

>   gauges and `SharedMetricsHolder` snapshots stay exactly as they are.

Author: Addressed -- the naming section now leads with the invariant (the attribute string is the `/metrics` string, byte for byte) and the strip/re-append mechanics are a labeled implementation detail that cancels out to that string. PTAL. Resolve if good, thanks!

  the surrounding span;
- never panics.

Install the meter provider at startup **before the first emit** (every NICo binary
already does, for its existing metrics); instruments resolve from the global meter once
per event type.

## 8. Testing the coherency

The `test-support` feature ships capture helpers, so "this event logged at WARN *and*
ticked the counter" is a plain unit test:

```rust
use carbide_instrument::testing::{capture_logs, MetricsCapture};

let metrics = MetricsCapture::start();
let logs = capture_logs(|| emit(PowerControlFailed { ... }));

assert_eq!(logs[0].level, tracing::Level::WARN);
assert_eq!(
    metrics.counter_delta("carbide_power_control_total", &[("backend", "rms"), ("outcome", "error")]),
    1.0,
);
```

`MetricsCapture` serializes metric-asserting tests behind a process-global registry;
`capture_logs` is per-thread. `render()` prints the raw exposition text when a test needs
eyeballing.

## 9. Sharp edges

- **`LogLimiter`-gated sites**: the limiter suppresses *before* any event fires, so a
  rate-limited log's true frequency is invisible to everything -- including the kit --

>   until the site migrates: metric ticks always, the limiter gates only the log line.

Author: Addressed -- split into before-migration (limiter suppresses before any event fires) and after-migration (metric ticks every occurrence, limiter gates only the log line). PTAL. Resolve if good, thanks!

  in `#[context]` and count without it.
- Per-object metric series remain the exception, and they stay on the opt-in,
  hold-time-bounded `PerObjectMetricsRegistry` -- not on event labels.

## 5. Histograms and observations

A histogram event carries exactly one `#[observation]` field: a `Duration` (converted to
the unit the metric name declares) or a plain number (recorded as-is).

```rust
#[derive(Event)]
#[event(
    name = "carbide_preingestion_bfb_copy_duration_seconds",
    component = "preingestion-manager",
    log = info,
    metric = histogram,
    message = "BFB copy finished",
)]
struct BfbCopyFinished {
    #[label]
    outcome: Outcome,
    #[observation]
    took: std::time::Duration, // recorded in seconds -- checked against the name
    #[context]
    host_ip: std::net::IpAddr,
}
```

A histogram already exports a `_count` series, so it never needs a twin counter.

## 6. Naming

The `name` in the attribute is the exposed Prometheus name, verbatim, and the derive
enforces the conventions at compile time:

- `carbide_` prefix (all new metrics).
- Counters end `_total`.
- Histograms end in their unit: `_seconds`, `_milliseconds`, `_microseconds`, `_bytes`.

> - Gauges (existing pattern, not the kit) end `_count`.

Author: Addressed -- the gauge line now says the legacy names are mixed and to follow neighboring names, not a single suffix rule. Also added `compile_fail` doctests for the two new derive rejections (`unit` on non-histograms, `describe` with `metric = none`). PTAL. Resolve if good, thanks!

> # NICo Instrumentation: one event, log + metric

Reviewer: Feels too "marketing-y" if you know what I mean
```suggestion
# NICo Instrumentation
```

Author: @polarweasel Done!

> How to instrument significant events with `carbide-instrument`: one declaration that

Reviewer: You don't ever mention what "the kit" is, so this should cover that base
```suggestion
How to instrument significant events with `carbide-instrument`: this kit provides a single declaration that
```

Author: @polarweasel Done!

- **Need a count, rate, or duration? Declare an `Event` and `emit()` it.** The event's two
  knobs -- `log = error|warn|info|debug|trace|off` and `metric = counter|histogram|none` --
  cover metric-only, log-only, or both from the same call.
- **Cardinality is enforced by the types.** `#[label]` fields must be bounded via
  `LabelValue` -- usually a fieldless enum, with a manual impl on a bounded newtype as the
  reviewed escape hatch; high-cardinality detail (`machine_id`, IPs, error text) goes in
  `#[context]` fields, which appear on the log line only and *cannot* become a metric label.
- **The metric name in the attribute is the exposed name, verbatim** -- what you grep on a
  dashboard is the string in the source. The derive validates it at compile time
  (`carbide_` prefix, `_total` for counters, a unit suffix for histograms).
- **Point-in-time state (gauges) is unchanged.** The kit models *occurrences*; observable
  gauges and `SharedMetricsHolder` snapshots stay exactly as they are.

Part of the instrumentation-coherency initiative
([#3169](https://github.com/NVIDIA/infra-controller/issues/3169)).

---

> ## 1. When to reach for it

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## 1. When to use carbide-instrument
```

Author: @polarweasel Done!

| You want | Use | Why |
|---|---|---|

> | A plain log line | `tracing::info!(%machine_id, "...")` | No metric ambition, no ceremony. Most log sites stay exactly like this. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| A plain log line | `tracing::info!(%machine_id, "...")` | No metric required. Most log sites stay exactly like this. |
```

Author: @polarweasel Done!

> | A failure you'd alert on | `emit(...)` with `log = warn, metric = counter` | The counter is the alert; the log line (same labels + context) is the drill-in. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| A failure you'd alert on | `emit(...)` with `log = warn, metric = counter` | The counter is the alert; the log line (same labels + context) provides the details. |
```

Author: @polarweasel Done!

| A hot-path rate (per packet / per request) | `emit(...)` with `log = off, metric = counter` | The rate is the signal; no log line is built at all -- zero logging cost, and the noise is gone. |
| A duration or size distribution | `emit(...)` with `metric = histogram` | `#[observation]` supplies the value; the unit comes from the metric name. |
| "How many are in state X right now" | An observable gauge (existing pattern) | State is not an occurrence. Keep `SharedMetricsHolder` + `u64_observable_gauge`. |

> Adoption is opt-in and call-site-by-call-site. Existing `tracing::` sites and existing

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Adoption is opt-in** and call-site-by-call-site. Existing `tracing::` sites and existing
```

Author: @polarweasel Done!

metric emitter structs keep working unchanged; when a site *does* migrate, its log line
keeps the same level, message, and fields (labels and context render as ordinary logfmt
fields), so greps and dashboards keep working -- it just also gains the metric.

## 2. Quick start

Declare the event next to the code that emits it:

```rust
use carbide_instrument::{emit, Event, LabelValue, Outcome};

#[derive(Debug, Clone, Copy, PartialEq, Eq, LabelValue)]
enum Backend {
    Nsm,
    Psm,
    Rms,
}

#[derive(Event)]
#[event(
    name      = "carbide_power_control_total", // the exposed name, verbatim
    component = "component_manager",
    log       = warn,                          // error|warn|info|debug|trace|off
    metric    = counter,                       // counter | histogram | none

>     message   = "power control failed",

Reviewer: Section 6 says you should give every metric a `describe` member. How about this as a start?

```suggestion
    message   = "power control failed",
    describe  = "Power control has failed.",
```

Author: @polarweasel Done!

)]
struct PowerControlFailed {
    #[label]
    backend: Backend, // enum -> label backend="rms" (metric AND log)
    #[label]
    outcome: Outcome, // the kit's shared ok|error vocabulary
    #[context]
    bmc_ip: std::net::IpAddr, // log-only, never a metric label
    #[context]
    error: String, // log-only
}

if let Err(e) = backend.power_control(&target, action).await {
    emit(PowerControlFailed {
        backend: Backend::Rms,
        outcome: Outcome::Error,
        bmc_ip,
        error: e.to_string(),
    });
}
```

> One `emit()` produces both, correlated by the surrounding span's `span_id`:

Reviewer: "One emit() produces both" _what_?

Also, I don't see a span_id in the counter output line, so what's correlating that?

Author: @polarweasel Done!

```logfmt
level=WARN component=nico-api span_id=0x4f... msg="power control failed" backend=rms outcome=error bmc_ip=10.0.0.5 error="deadline exceeded" location="..."
```

```text
carbide_power_control_total{backend="rms",outcome="error"} 1
```

> ## 3. The two knobs

Reviewer: No on the knobs :)

```suggestion
## 3. Log and metric options
```

Author: @polarweasel Done!

Every event declares its log side and its metric side independently:

| `#[event(...)]` | Log line? | Metric? | Use for |
|---|---|---|---|
| `log = warn, metric = none` | yes | -- | a typed structured log (rare; plain `tracing::` is usually fine) |
| `log = warn, metric = counter` | yes | yes | a failure you alert on *and* read |
| `log = off, metric = counter` | -- | yes | hot paths where the rate is the signal |

> | `log = off, metric = histogram` | -- | yes | high-frequency latency as a distribution only |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `log = warn, metric = none` | Yes | No | A typed structured log (rare; plain `tracing::` is usually fine) |
| `log = warn, metric = counter` | Yes | Yes | A failure you alert on *and* read |
| `log = off, metric = counter` | No | Yes | Hot paths where the rate is the signal |
| `log = off, metric = histogram` | No | Yes | High-frequency latency as a distribution only |
```

Author: @polarweasel Done!

`log = off` constructs no `tracing` event at all -- it is not "logged then filtered".

For per-instance control (count everything, log only failures), implement
`Event::log_at()` by hand; derive support for dynamic levels arrives with the

> outbound-call RED helper ([#3172](https://github.com/NVIDIA/infra-controller/issues/3172)).

Reviewer: Be sure to search for the issue number when you're doing the work for 3172!

Author: @polarweasel Noted -- will update this reference when #3172 lands (pinned a reminder on that issue too).

> ## 4. Labels vs context: the cardinality rules

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## 4. Rules for labels and context
```

Author: @polarweasel Done!

A metric's time-series count is the product of its label domains, so every label domain
must be small and closed. The kit makes that structural instead of a review checklist:

- **`#[label]` fields must implement `LabelValue`**, which is derivable **only for
  fieldless enums**. A derived label value is the variant's snake_case name.
  `String` never implements it.
- **`#[context]` fields take anything `Display`** and appear on the log line only. This is

>   where `machine_id`, addresses, and error text belong. A context field physically cannot

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  where `machine_id`, addresses, and error text belong. A context field cannot
```

Author: @polarweasel Done!

  become a metric label.

> - **Bounded-but-not-an-enum values** (a vendor string, a SKU) can go through a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Bounded-but-not-enumerated values** such as a vendor strings or SKUs can go through a
```

Author: @polarweasel Done!

Reviewer: Oops, this should've been "such as ~~a~~ vendor strings or SKUs..."

Reviewer: Bad diff view, it's fixed.

  **manual `impl LabelValue` on a newtype** -- the deliberate, greppable escape hatch, and

>   the place to justify boundedness at review. The bar is real boundedness *at the call

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  the place to justify boundedness at review. The deciding factor should be real boundedness *at the call
```

Author: @polarweasel Done!

  site*: a raw request-path segment is not bounded even when a proto surface suggests it
  should be -- caller-supplied values mint unbounded series. When in doubt, keep the value
  in `#[context]` and count without it.
- Per-object metric series remain the exception, and they stay on the opt-in,
  hold-time-bounded `PerObjectMetricsRegistry` -- not on event labels.

## 5. Histograms and observations

A histogram event carries exactly one `#[observation]` field: a `Duration` (converted to
the unit the metric name declares) or a plain number (recorded as-is).

```rust
#[derive(Event)]
#[event(
    name = "carbide_preingestion_bfb_copy_duration_seconds",
    component = "preingestion-manager",
    log = info,
    metric = histogram,
    message = "BFB copy finished",
)]
struct BfbCopyFinished {
    #[label]
    outcome: Outcome,
    #[observation]
    took: std::time::Duration, // recorded in seconds -- checked against the name
    #[context]
    host_ip: std::net::IpAddr,
}
```

A histogram already exports a `_count` series, so it never needs a twin counter.

> ## 6. Naming

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## 6. Naming conventions
```

Author: @polarweasel Done!

The `name` in the attribute is the exposed Prometheus name, verbatim, and the derive
enforces the conventions at compile time:

> - `carbide_` prefix (all new metrics).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- All new metrics use the `carbide_` prefix.
```

Author: @polarweasel Done!

> - Counters end `_total`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Counter names have a `_total` suffix.
```

Author: @polarweasel Done!

- Histograms end in their unit: `_seconds`, `_milliseconds`, `_microseconds`, `_bytes`.

> - Gauge names (existing pattern, not the kit) are mixed legacy forms; follow the established

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Gauge names (existing pattern, not the kit) are mixed legacy forms; follow established
```

Author: @polarweasel Done!

  neighboring names rather than a single suffix rule.

The name in the attribute is what lands on `/metrics`, byte for byte -- a dashboard name
greps straight back to the declaring line. (Implementation detail: the Prometheus exporter
insists on appending the conventional suffix itself, so the kit registers the instrument

> with that suffix stripped; the two cancel out to exactly the attribute string.)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
greps straight back to the declaring line. (Implementation detail: the Prometheus exporter
appends the conventional suffix, so the kit registers the instrument
without the suffix; the two cancel out to exactly the attribute string.)
```

Author: @polarweasel Done!

**Existing metric names never change.** Migrating a pre-standard site onto the kit keeps
its frozen name via `name_unchecked` (plus an explicit `unit = "..."` for histograms);

> the opt-out is greppable, and new metrics cannot use it silently.

Reviewer: Can you clarify "the opt-out is greppable" here?

Author: @polarweasel Done!

> Give every metric a `describe = "..."` -- it becomes the Prometheus HELP text and the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Give every metric a `describe = "..."` attribute -- it becomes the Prometheus HELP text and the
```

Author: @polarweasel Done!

Description column of the [core_metrics.md](core_metrics.md) catalogue, which is
regenerated by `test_integration` and checked in CI.

> ## 7. What the derive generates (and what it costs)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## 7. Derivation outputs and costs
```

Author: @polarweasel Done!

> `#[derive(Event)]` is thiserror-style: a plain struct you can construct, test, and match,

Reviewer: Let's link to the docs for this one, assuming not everyone who needs to use this is actually fluent in Rust

```suggestion
`#[derive(Event)]` is [thiserror](https://docs.rs/thiserror/latest/thiserror/)-style: a plain struct you can construct, test, and match,
```

Author: @polarweasel Done!

with the semantics in attributes. The generated code:

- builds labels as a fixed-size array (no heap allocation on emit) with enum values
  rendering as `&'static str`;
- caches the OTel instrument in a per-event-type `OnceLock` -- a metric-only emit is an
  atomic load plus an `add()`;
- emits the log via `tracing::event!` with real static field names, so `logfmt`, the
  admin-UI log stream, and every other subscriber layer see an ordinary tracing event in
  the surrounding span;

> - never panics.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Builds labels as a fixed-size array (no heap allocation on emit) with enum values
  rendering as `&'static str`
- Caches the OTel instrument in a per-event-type `OnceLock` -- a metric-only emit is an
  atomic load plus an `add()`
- Emits the log via `tracing::event!` with real static field names, so `logfmt`, the
  admin-UI log stream, and every other subscriber layer see an ordinary tracing event in
  the surrounding span
- Never panics
```

Author: @polarweasel Done!

Install the meter provider at startup **before the first emit** (every NICo binary
already does, for its existing metrics); instruments resolve from the global meter once

> per event type.

Reviewer: I feel like this belongs in section 2 (quick start). It's not a product of derivation, and we don't have a "best practices" section, so is quick start the next best?

Author: @polarweasel Done!

## 8. Testing the coherency

> The `test-support` feature ships capture helpers, so "this event logged at WARN *and*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `test-support` feature provides capture helpers, so "this event logged at WARN *and*
```

Reviewer: Also, is "test-support" a feature name that's in the docs anywhere? It's not mentioned in your code sample here 😀

Author: @polarweasel Done!

ticked the counter" is a plain unit test:

```rust
use carbide_instrument::testing::{capture_logs, MetricsCapture};

let metrics = MetricsCapture::start();
let logs = capture_logs(|| emit(PowerControlFailed { ... }));

assert_eq!(logs[0].level, tracing::Level::WARN);
assert_eq!(
    metrics.counter_delta("carbide_power_control_total", &[("backend", "rms"), ("outcome", "error")]),
    1.0,
);
```

`MetricsCapture` serializes metric-asserting tests behind a process-global registry;
`capture_logs` is per-thread. `render()` prints the raw exposition text when a test needs

> eyeballing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`capture_logs` is per-thread. `render()` prints the raw exposition text when a test needs
inspection.
```

Author: @polarweasel Done!

> ## 9. Sharp edges

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## 9. Potential hazards
```

Author: @polarweasel Done!

- **`LogLimiter`-gated sites**: before migration, the limiter suppresses the log call
  before any event fires, so the true rate is invisible to everything -- including the
  kit. After migration onto an `Event`, the metric ticks on every occurrence and the
  limiter gates only the log line.
- **The logfmt `component` key** continues to come from the subscriber configuration and
  span attributes (as everywhere else); the event's `component` names the subsystem for
  tooling and tests and is not written as a log field.
- **Events are occurrences.** Do not model state with counters; keep gauges on the
  existing observable-gauge pattern.

> - **Don't name a field `message`** -- it is reserved for the event message.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Don't name a field `message`** -- that name is reserved for the event message.
```

Author: @polarweasel Done!
